* CDN **content delivery network, or content distribution network, is a geographically distributed network of proxy servers and their data centers.** The goal is to provide high availability and performance by distributing the service spatially relative to end users.
* A content delivery network (CDN) **refers to a geographically distributed group of servers which work together to provide fast delivery of Internet content. A CDN allows for the quick transfer of assets needed for loading Internet content including HTML pages, javascript files, stylesheets, images, and videos.**
  *  Some of the benefits of using a CDN for your website include: Faster load times for web and mobile users. Quickly scalable during times of heavy traffic.
  * **Akamai Aura Licensed CDN** is a suite of operator CDN solutions that enable next generation IP video services delivered any device. ... And Akamai media delivery services satisfy audience demand for media streaming content and large file downloads delivered live and on-demand
  * **Amazon CloudFront** is a fast content delivery network (CDN) service that securely delivers data, videos, applications, and APIs to customers globally with low latency, high transfer speeds, all within a developer-friendly environment. **CloudFront is integrated with AWS – both physical locations that are directly connected to the AWS global infrastructure, as well as other AWS services.** CloudFront works seamlessly with services including AWS Shield for DDoS mitigation, Amazon S3, Elastic Load Balancing or Amazon EC2 as origins for your applications, and **Lambda@Edge** to run custom code closer to customers’ users and to customize the user experience. Lastly, if you use AWS origins such as Amazon S3, Amazon EC2 or Elastic Load Balancing, you don’t pay for any data transferred between these services and CloudFront.
  * If you’re looking for a CDN with security features but already enjoy the use of another CDN, **Incapsula content delivery network (CDN) offers complete website security to protect your web assets.** Many organizations use more than one CDN. For example, LinkedIn uses three CDNs, whereas eBay uses two. Providing redundancy, load balancing, site acceleration, protection against data leakage—and now increased APAC coverage—Incapsula CDN can be deployed along with your existing service.
